Add BOM definition to the OTel starter (#3672)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/docs/instrumentation/java/automatic/spring-boot.md

## Configuration

### OpenTelemetry BOM

You have to import the `opentelemetry-bom` BOM before using the OpenTelemetry
starter. We also recommend that you import now the
`opentelemetry-instrumentation-bom-alpha`.

We show below how to import the two BOMs with Maven:

```xml
<dependencyManagement>
    <dependencies>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>io.opentelemetry</groupId>
            <artifactId>opentelemetry-bom</artifactId>
            <version>{{% param vers.otel %}}</version>
            <type>pom</type>
        </dependency>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>io.opentelemetry.instrumentation</groupId>
            <artifactId>opentelemetry-instrumentation-bom-alpha</artifactId>
            <version>{{% param vers.instrumentation %}}-alpha</version>
            <type>pom</type>
        </dependency>
    </dependencies>
</dependencyManagement>
```

With Gradle and Spring Boot, you have
[two ways](https://docs.spring.io/spring-boot/docs/current/gradle-plugin/reference/htmlsingle/)
to import a BOM.

> You can Gradle’s native bom support:

Author: The Spring Boot documentation is using bom: https://docs.spring.io/spring-boot/docs/current/gradle-plugin/reference/htmlsingle/

The Maven (https://maven.apache.org/guides/introduction/introduction-to-dependency-mechanism.html) and Gradle (https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/platforms.html) documentations are using BOM.

BOM means "Bill Of Materials".

So, I would say BOM.

## Configuration

> ### OpenTelemetry BOM

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Bill of Materials
```

> Import the `opentelemetry-bom` and `opentelemetry-instrumentation-bom-alpha`
> BOMs before using the OpenTelemetry starter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Import the `opentelemetry-bom` and `opentelemetry-instrumentation-bom-alpha` Bill of Materials (BOMs) before using the OpenTelemetry Starter.
```

Can you provide some context to the reader why they may want to, should or have to include this?

Author: I have added explanations: 3080196cec7cd23e209ac07a732209cb7e6b7eca

Reviewer: I will take another look, thx

The following example shows how to import both BOMs using Maven:

```xml
<dependencyManagement>
    <dependencies>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>io.opentelemetry</groupId>
            <artifactId>opentelemetry-bom</artifactId>
            <version>{{% param vers.otel %}}</version>
            <type>pom</type>
        </dependency>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>io.opentelemetry.instrumentation</groupId>
            <artifactId>opentelemetry-instrumentation-bom-alpha</artifactId>
            <version>{{% param vers.instrumentation %}}-alpha</version>
            <type>pom</type>
        </dependency>
    </dependencies>
</dependencyManagement>
```

With Gradle and Spring Boot, you have
[two ways](https://docs.spring.io/spring-boot/docs/current/gradle-plugin/reference/htmlsingle/)
to import a BOM.

> You can use the Gradle’s native bom support:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use the Gradle’s native BOM support:
```

```kotlin
plugins {
  id("java")
  id("org.springframework.boot") version "3.2.O"
}

dependencies {
  implementation(platform(SpringBootPlugin.BOM_COORDINATES))
  implementation(platform("io.opentelemetry:opentelemetry-bom:{{% param vers.otel %}}"))
  implementation(platform("io.opentelemetry.instrumentation:opentelemetry-instrumentation-bom-alpha:{{% param vers.instrumentation %}}-alpha"))
}
```

The other way with Gradle is to use the `io.spring.dependency-management`
plugin:

```kotlin
plugins {
  id("java")
  id("org.springframework.boot") version "3.2.O"
  id("io.spring.dependency-management") version "1.1.0"
}

dependencyManagement {
  imports {
    mavenBom("io.opentelemetry:opentelemetry-bom:{{% param vers.otel %}}")
    mavenBom("io.opentelemetry.instrumentation:opentelemetry-instrumentation-bom-alpha:{{% param vers.instrumentation %}}-alpha")
  }
}
```

Please note that the `dependencyManagement` is updated with this second way, not
the `dependencies` part.

> {{% alert title="Note" color="info" %}} Be careful not to mix up the different
> ways of configuring things with Gradle. For example, don't use
> `implementation(platform(SpringBootPlugin.BOM_COORDINATES))` with the
> `io.spring.dependency-management` plugin.{{% /alert %}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{% alert title="Note" color="info" %}} 

Be careful not to mix up the different
ways of configuring things with Gradle. For example, don't use
`implementation(platform(SpringBootPlugin.BOM_COORDINATES))` with the
`io.spring.dependency-management` plugin.

{{% /alert %}}
```

If you add additional new lines the alert tags remain in their own lines

> ### OpenTelemetry starter dependency

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### OpenTelemetry Starter dependency
```

## Configuration

### Dependency management

> A Bill of Material ([BOM](https://maven.apache.org/guides/introduction/introduction-to-dependency-mechanism.html#bill-of-materials-bom-poms)) allows you to fix the versions of dependencies, including transitive ones.

Reviewer 2: (to make it sound more important as opposed to an optional thing. even if it is optional, we want to strongly encourage it)
```suggestion
A Bill of Material ([BOM](https://maven.apache.org/guides/introduction/introduction-to-dependency-mechanism.html#bill-of-materials-bom-poms)) ensures that versions of dependencies (including transitive ones) are aligned.
```

## Configuration

> ### Bill of Materials

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Dependency management
```

Author: I would prefer to keep "Bill of Materials" because the next section is  "OpenTelemetry Starter dependency"

Reviewer 2: my thought is that someone who doesn't know what Bill Of Materials are may skip over the section and go straight to "OpenTelemetry Starter dependency"

A Bill of Material ([BOM](https://maven.apache.org/guides/introduction/introduction-to-dependency-mechanism.html#bill-of-materials-bom-poms)) allows you to fix the versions of dependencies, including transitive ones.

> By importing the `opentelemetry-bom` and `opentelemetry-instrumentation-bom-alpha` BOMs before using the OpenTelemetry starter, you will ensure consistent versions for all the OpenTelemetry dependencies.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Importing the `opentelemetry-bom` and `opentelemetry-instrumentation-bom-alpha` BOMs when using the OpenTelemetry starter is important to ensure version alignment across all OpenTelemetry dependencies.
```

            <type>pom</type>
        </dependency>
    </dependencies>
</dependencyManagement>
```

With Gradle and Spring Boot, you have
[two ways](https://docs.spring.io/spring-boot/docs/current/gradle-plugin/reference/htmlsingle/)
to import a BOM.

You can use the Gradle’s native BOM support:

```kotlin
plugins {
  id("java")
  id("org.springframework.boot") version "3.2.O"
}

dependencies {
  implementation(platform(SpringBootPlugin.BOM_COORDINATES))
  implementation(platform("io.opentelemetry:opentelemetry-bom:{{% param vers.otel %}}"))
  implementation(platform("io.opentelemetry.instrumentation:opentelemetry-instrumentation-bom-alpha:{{% param vers.instrumentation %}}-alpha"))
}
```

The other way with Gradle is to use the `io.spring.dependency-management`
plugin:

```kotlin
plugins {
  id("java")
  id("org.springframework.boot") version "3.2.O"
  id("io.spring.dependency-management") version "1.1.0"
}

dependencyManagement {
  imports {
    mavenBom("io.opentelemetry:opentelemetry-bom:{{% param vers.otel %}}")
    mavenBom("io.opentelemetry.instrumentation:opentelemetry-instrumentation-bom-alpha:{{% param vers.instrumentation %}}-alpha")
  }
}
```

> Please note that the `dependencyManagement` is updated with this second way, not

Author: @zeitlinger Please check fb969bf2761b1fe82e59ed509aa610d1b5b79a16

> Please note that the `dependencyManagement` is updated with this second way, not

Reviewer 3: sounds good

the `dependencies` part.

{{% alert title="Note" color="info" %}}

> Be careful not to mix up the different ways of configuring things with Gradle.

Author: I don't know for Dependabot. Renovate only supports the first mechanism: https://github.com/renovatebot/renovate/issues/4614#issuecomment-557488428. I am hesitant to add this information about Renovate because Renovate may also support the second mechanism in the future.

> Be careful not to mix up the different ways of configuring things with Gradle.

Reviewer 3: ok

## Configuration

### Bill of Materials

Import the `opentelemetry-bom` and `opentelemetry-instrumentation-bom-alpha`

> BOMs before using the OpenTelemetry starter.

Reviewer: Some people might not know what a BOM is and why they need it. As of today this is the first reference to this topic, so adding a few words on what it is and why you want it/need it, would be helpful to the reader.

Author: @svrnm A BOM is something usual in the Java world. [This Spring Boot documentation](https://docs.spring.io/spring-boot/docs/current/gradle-plugin/reference/htmlsingle/) just use "bom". I have added explanations about the interest of using BOMs with the OTel starter:

    The `opentelemetry-bom` BOM will allow you to align the OpenTelemetry versions
    of the OpenTelemetry dependencies and transitive dependencies.
    
    With the `opentelemetry-instrumentation-bom-alpha` BOM, you won't have to
    declare the dependency versions for additional instrumentations.

Author: @svrnm I have added a link to the BOM definition: 3783e53408a1359c2681502ac8f7dfe17db34b63 Do you think that it's a good trade off to not re-explain a classical notion in the Java world but to offer the possibility to quickly have the definition for some junior Java developers?

> The `opentelemetry-bom` BOM will allow you to align the OpenTelemetry versions
> of the OpenTelemetry starter and Spring Boot 3.

Reviewer 2: (maybe?)
```suggestion
The `opentelemetry-bom` BOM will align the OpenTelemetry versions
used by the OpenTelemetry starter and its transitive dependencies.
```

Author: I have added a more generic formulation.

> ### Bill of Materials
> 
> Import the `opentelemetry-bom` and `opentelemetry-instrumentation-bom-alpha`
> Bill of Materials ([BOM](https://maven.apache.org/guides/introduction/introduction-to-dependency-mechanism.html#bill-of-materials-bom-poms)) before using the OpenTelemetry starter.
> 
> The `opentelemetry-bom` BOM will allow you to align the OpenTelemetry versions
> of the OpenTelemetry dependencies and transitive dependencies.
> 
> With the `opentelemetry-instrumentation-bom-alpha` BOM, you won't have to
> declare the dependency versions for additional instrumentations.

Reviewer 2: tried to simplify a bit and make it more beginner friendly, not sure if I succeeded...

```suggestion
### Dependencies

Importing the `opentelemetry-bom` and `opentelemetry-instrumentation-bom-alpha` BOMs will ensure that the versions of your OpenTelemetry dependencies (and transitive dependencies) are aligned.
```

Author: I prefer this version. Thanks!

Author: @svrnm What do you think? Would it be good enough for merging?

Reviewer: What's missing for me: the term BOM needs to be written out when used for the first time Bill Of Materials (BOM), and then some light reason what it is (in general terms) and why someone wants to have that, e.g.

```
A Bill of Materials (BOM) is a summary of the components used within a software artifact, which helps with compliance and security. By importing the ...
```

Author: @svrnm Could you please check the new version?

Reviewer: lgtm now. @trask any more comments?

to import a BOM.

You can use the Gradle’s native BOM support:

```kotlin
plugins {
  id("java")
  id("org.springframework.boot") version "3.2.O"
}

dependencies {
  implementation(platform(SpringBootPlugin.BOM_COORDINATES))
  implementation(platform("io.opentelemetry:opentelemetry-bom:{{% param vers.otel %}}"))
  implementation(platform("io.opentelemetry.instrumentation:opentelemetry-instrumentation-bom-alpha:{{% param vers.instrumentation %}}-alpha"))
}
```

The other way with Gradle is to use the `io.spring.dependency-management`
plugin:

```kotlin
plugins {
  id("java")
  id("org.springframework.boot") version "3.2.O"
  id("io.spring.dependency-management") version "1.1.0"
}

dependencyManagement {
  imports {
    mavenBom("io.opentelemetry:opentelemetry-bom:{{% param vers.otel %}}")
    mavenBom("io.opentelemetry.instrumentation:opentelemetry-instrumentation-bom-alpha:{{% param vers.instrumentation %}}-alpha")
  }
}
```

Please note that the `dependencyManagement` is updated with this second way, not
the `dependencies` part.

{{% alert title="Note" color="info" %}}

Be careful not to mix up the different ways of configuring things with Gradle.
For example, don't use

> `implementation(platform(SpringBootPlugin.BOM_COORDINATES))` with the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`implementation(platform("io.opentelemetry:opentelemetry-bom:{{% param vers.otel %}}"))` with the
```
